Python

for Algorithmic
Trading
From Idea to Cloud Deployment

Yves Hilpisch

Python for Algorithmic Trading
From Idea to Cloud Deployment

Yves Hilpisch

Beijing

Boston Farnham Sebastopol

Tokyo

Python for Algorithmic Trading
by Yves Hilpisch
Copyright © 2021 Yves Hilpisch. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions are
also available for most titles (http://oreilly.com). For more information, contact our corporate/institutional
sales department: 800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.

Acquisitions Editor: Michelle Smith
Development Editor: Michele Cronin
Production Editor: Daniel Elfanbaum
Copyeditor: Piper Editorial LLC
Proofreader: nSight, Inc.
November 2020:

Indexer: WordCo Indexing Services, Inc.
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Jose Marzan
Illustrator: Kate Dullea

First Edition

Revision History for the First Edition
2020-11-11: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781492053354 for release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Python for Algorithmic Trading, the
cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
The views expressed in this work are those of the author, and do not represent the publisher’s views.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the information and
instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and the author disclaim all responsibility
for errors or omissions, including without limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of
or reliance on this work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to open source
licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsibility to ensure that your use
thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights. This book is not intended as financial advice. Please
consult a qualified professional if you require financial advice.

978-1-492-05335-4
[LSI]

Table of Contents

Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
1. Python and Algorithmic Trading. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Python for Finance
Python Versus Pseudo-Code
NumPy and Vectorization
pandas and the DataFrame Class
Algorithmic Trading
Python for Algorithmic Trading
Focus and Prerequisites
Trading Strategies
Simple Moving Averages
Momentum
Mean Reversion
Machine and Deep Learning
Conclusions
References and Further Resources

1
2
3
5
7
11
13
13
14
14
14
15
15
15

2. Python Infrastructure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Conda as a Package Manager
Installing Miniconda
Basic Operations with Conda
Conda as a Virtual Environment Manager
Using Docker Containers
Docker Images and Containers
Building a Ubuntu and Python Docker Image
Using Cloud Instances
RSA Public and Private Keys

19
19
21
27
30
31
31
36
38
iii

Jupyter Notebook Configuration File
Installation Script for Python and Jupyter Lab
Script to Orchestrate the Droplet Set Up
Conclusions
References and Further Resources

38
40
41
43
44

3. Working with Financial Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Reading Financial Data From Different Sources
The Data Set
Reading from a CSV File with Python
Reading from a CSV File with pandas
Exporting to Excel and JSON
Reading from Excel and JSON
Working with Open Data Sources
Eikon Data API
Retrieving Historical Structured Data
Retrieving Historical Unstructured Data
Storing Financial Data Efficiently
Storing DataFrame Objects
Using TsTables
Storing Data with SQLite3
Conclusions
References and Further Resources
Python Scripts

46
46
47
49
50
51
52
55
58
62
65
66
70
75
77
78
78

4. Mastering Vectorized Backtesting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Making Use of Vectorization
Vectorization with NumPy
Vectorization with pandas
Strategies Based on Simple Moving Averages
Getting into the Basics
Generalizing the Approach
Strategies Based on Momentum
Getting into the Basics
Generalizing the Approach
Strategies Based on Mean Reversion
Getting into the Basics
Generalizing the Approach
Data Snooping and Overfitting
Conclusions
References and Further Resources
Python Scripts

iv

|

Table of Contents

82
83
85
88
89
97
98
99
104
107
107
110
111
113
113
115

SMA Backtesting Class
Momentum Backtesting Class
Mean Reversion Backtesting Class

115
118
120

5. Predicting Market Movements with Machine Learning. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
Using Linear Regression for Market Movement Prediction
A Quick Review of Linear Regression
The Basic Idea for Price Prediction
Predicting Index Levels
Predicting Future Returns
Predicting Future Market Direction
Vectorized Backtesting of Regression-Based Strategy
Generalizing the Approach
Using Machine Learning for Market Movement Prediction
Linear Regression with scikit-learn
A Simple Classification Problem
Using Logistic Regression to Predict Market Direction
Generalizing the Approach
Using Deep Learning for Market Movement Prediction
The Simple Classification Problem Revisited
Using Deep Neural Networks to Predict Market Direction
Adding Different Types of Features
Conclusions
References and Further Resources
Python Scripts
Linear Regression Backtesting Class
Classification Algorithm Backtesting Class

124
125
127
129
132
134
135
137
139
139
141
146
150
153
154
156
162
166
166
167
167
170

6. Building Classes for Event-Based Backtesting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
Backtesting Base Class
Long-Only Backtesting Class
Long-Short Backtesting Class
Conclusions
References and Further Resources
Python Scripts
Backtesting Base Class
Long-Only Backtesting Class
Long-Short Backtesting Class

177
182
185
190
190
191
191
194
197

7. Working with Real-Time Data and Sockets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
Running a Simple Tick Data Server
Connecting a Simple Tick Data Client

203
206

Table of Contents

|

v

Signal Generation in Real Time
Visualizing Streaming Data with Plotly
The Basics
Three Real-Time Streams
Three Sub-Plots for Three Streams
Streaming Data as Bars
Conclusions
References and Further Resources
Python Scripts
Sample Tick Data Server
Tick Data Client
Momentum Online Algorithm
Sample Data Server for Bar Plot

208
211
211
212
214
215
217
218
218
218
219
219
220

8. CFD Trading with Oanda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
Setting Up an Account
The Oanda API
Retrieving Historical Data
Looking Up Instruments Available for Trading
Backtesting a Momentum Strategy on Minute Bars
Factoring In Leverage and Margin
Working with Streaming Data
Placing Market Orders
Implementing Trading Strategies in Real Time
Retrieving Account Information
Conclusions
References and Further Resources
Python Script

227
229
230
230
231
234
236
237
239
244
246
247
247

9. FX Trading with FXCM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
Getting Started
Retrieving Data
Retrieving Tick Data
Retrieving Candles Data
Working with the API
Retrieving Historical Data
Retrieving Streaming Data
Placing Orders
Account Information
Conclusions
References and Further Resources

vi

| Table of Contents

251
251
252
254
256
257
259
260
262
263
264

10. Automating Trading Operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 265
Capital Management
Kelly Criterion in Binomial Setting
Kelly Criterion for Stocks and Indices
ML-Based Trading Strategy
Vectorized Backtesting
Optimal Leverage
Risk Analysis
Persisting the Model Object
Online Algorithm
Infrastructure and Deployment
Logging and Monitoring
Visual Step-by-Step Overview
Configuring Oanda Account
Setting Up the Hardware
Setting Up the Python Environment
Uploading the Code
Running the Code
Real-Time Monitoring
Conclusions
References and Further Resources
Python Script
Automated Trading Strategy
Strategy Monitoring

266
266
272
277
278
285
287
290
291
296
297
299
299
300
301
302
302
304
304
305
305
305
308

Appendix. Python, NumPy, matplotlib, pandas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351

Table of Contents

|

vii

Preface

Dataism says that the universe consists of data flows, and the value of any phenom‐
enon or entity is determined by its contribution to data processing….Dataism thereby
collapses the barrier between animals [humans] and machines, and expects electronic
algorithms to eventually decipher and outperform biochemical algorithms.1
—Yuval Noah Harari

Finding the right algorithm to automatically and successfully trade in financial mar‐
kets is the holy grail in finance. Not too long ago, algorithmic trading was only avail‐
able and possible for institutional players with deep pockets and lots of assets under
management. Recent developments in the areas of open source, open data, cloud
compute, and cloud storage, as well as online trading platforms, have leveled the play‐
ing field for smaller institutions and individual traders, making it possible to get
started in this fascinating discipline while equipped only with a typical notebook or
desktop computer and a reliable internet connection.
Nowadays, Python and its ecosystem of powerful packages is the technology platform
of choice for algorithmic trading. Among other things, Python allows you to do
efficient data analytics (with pandas, for example), to apply machine learning to stock
market prediction (with scikit-learn, for example), or even to make use of Google’s
deep learning technology with TensorFlow.
This is a book about Python for algorithmic trading, primarily in the context of alpha
generating strategies (see Chapter 1). Such a book at the intersection of two vast and
exciting fields can hardly cover all topics of relevance. However, it can cover a range
of important meta topics in depth.

1 Harari, Yuval Noah. 2015. Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow. London: Harvill Secker.

ix

These topics include:
Financial data
Financial data is at the core of every algorithmic trading project. Python and
packages like NumPy and pandas do a great job of handling and working with
structured financial data of any kind (end-of-day, intraday, high frequency).
Backtesting
There should be no automated algorithmic trading without a rigorous testing of
the trading strategy to be deployed. The book covers, among other things, trad‐
ing strategies based on simple moving averages, momentum, mean-reversion,
and machine/deep-learning based prediction.
Real-time data
Algorithmic trading requires dealing with real-time data, online algorithms
based on it, and visualization in real time. The book provides an introduction to
socket programming with ZeroMQ and streaming visualization.
Online platforms
No trading can take place without a trading platform. The book covers two pop‐
ular electronic trading platforms: Oanda and FXCM.
Automation
The beauty, as well as some major challenges, in algorithmic trading results from
the automation of the trading operation. The book shows how to deploy Python
in the cloud and how to set up an environment appropriate for automated
algorithmic trading.
The book offers a unique learning experience with the following features and
benefits:
Coverage of relevant topics
This is the only book covering such a breadth and depth with regard to relevant
topics in Python for algorithmic trading (see the following).
Self-contained code base
The book is accompanied by a Git repository with all codes in a self-contained,
executable form. The repository is available on the Quant Platform.
Real trading as the goal
The coverage of two different online trading platforms puts the reader in the
position to start both paper and live trading efficiently. To this end, the book
equips the reader with relevant, practical, and valuable background knowledge.
Do-it-yourself and self-paced approach
Since the material and the code are self-contained and only rely on standard
Python packages, the reader has full knowledge of and full control over what is
x

|

Preface

going on, how to use the code examples, how to change them, and so on. There is
no need to rely on third-party platforms, for instance, to do the backtesting or to
connect to the trading platforms. With this book, the reader can do all this on
their own at a convenient pace and has every single line of code to do so.
User forum
Although the reader should be able to follow along seamlessly, the author and
The Python Quants are there to help. The reader can post questions and com‐
ments in the user forum on the Quant Platform at any time (accounts are free).
Online/video training (paid subscription)
The Python Quants offer comprehensive online training programs that make use
of the contents presented in the book and that add additional content, covering
important topics such as financial data science, artificial intelligence in finance,
Python for Excel and databases, and additional Python tools and skills.

Contents and Structure
Here’s a quick overview of the topics and contents presented in each chapter.
Chapter 1, Python and Algorithmic Trading
The first chapter is an introduction to the topic of algorithmic trading—that is,
the automated trading of financial instruments based on computer algorithms. It
discusses fundamental notions in this context and also addresses, among other
things, what the expected prerequisites for reading the book are.
Chapter 2, Python Infrastructure
This chapter lays the technical foundations for all subsequent chapters in that it
shows how to set up a proper Python environment. This chapter mainly uses
conda as a package and environment manager. It illustrates Python deployment
via Docker containers and in the cloud.
Chapter 3, Working with Financial Data
Financial time series data is central to every algorithmic trading project. This
chapter shows you how to retrieve financial data from different public data and
proprietary data sources. It also demonstrates how to store financial time series
data efficiently with Python.
Chapter 4, Mastering Vectorized Backtesting
Vectorization is a powerful approach in numerical computation in general and
for financial analytics in particular. This chapter introduces vectorization with
NumPy and pandas and applies that approach to the backtesting of SMA-based,
momentum, and mean-reversion strategies.

Preface

|

xi

Chapter 5, Predicting Market Movements with Machine Learning
This chapter is dedicated to generating market predictions by the use of machine
learning and deep learning approaches. By mainly relying on past return obser‐
vations as features, approaches are presented for predicting tomorrow’s market
direction by using such Python packages as Keras in combination with Tensor
Flow and scikit-learn.
Chapter 6, Building Classes for Event-Based Backtesting
While vectorized backtesting has advantages when it comes to conciseness of
code and performance, it’s limited with regard to the representation of certain
market features of trading strategies. On the other hand, event-based backtesting,
technically implemented by the use of object oriented programming, allows for a
rather granular and more realistic modeling of such features. This chapter
presents and explains in detail a base class as well as two classes for the backtest‐
ing of long-only and long-short trading strategies.
Chapter 7, Working with Real-Time Data and Sockets
Needing to cope with real-time or streaming data is a reality even for the ambi‐
tious individual algorithmic trader. The tool of choice is socket programming, for
which this chapter introduces ZeroMQ as a lightweight and scalable technology.
The chapter also illustrates how to make use of Plotly to create nice looking,
interactive streaming plots.
Chapter 8, CFD Trading with Oanda
Oanda is a foreign exchange (forex, FX) and Contracts for Difference (CFD)
trading platform offering a broad set of tradable instruments, such as those based
on foreign exchange pairs, stock indices, commodities, or rates instruments
(benchmark bonds). This chapter provides guidance on how to implement auto‐
mated algorithmic trading strategies with Oanda, making use of the Python
wrapper package tpqoa.
Chapter 9, FX Trading with FXCM
FXCM is another forex and CFD trading platform that has recently released a
modern RESTful API for algorithmic trading. Available instruments span multi‐
ple asset classes, such as forex, stock indices, or commodities. A Python wrapper
package that makes algorithmic trading based on Python code rather convenient
and efficient is available (http://fxcmpy.tpq.io).
Chapter 10, Automating Trading Operations
This chapter deals with capital management, risk analysis and management, as
well as with typical tasks in the technical automation of algorithmic trading oper‐
ations. It covers, for instance, the Kelly criterion for capital allocation and
leverage in detail.

xii

|

Preface

Appendix
The appendix provides a concise introduction to the most important Python,
NumPy, and pandas topics in the context of the material presented in the main
chapters. It represents a starting point from which one can add to one’s own
Python knowledge over time.
Figure P-1 shows the layers related to algorithmic trading that the chapters cover
from the bottom to the top. It necessarily starts with the Python infrastructure (Chap‐
ter 2), and adds financial data (Chapter 3), strategy, and vectorized backtesting code
(Chapters 4 and 5). Until that point, data sets are used and manipulated as a whole.
Event-based backtesting for the first time introduces the idea that data in the real
world arrives incrementally (Chapter 6). It is the bridge that leads to the connecting
code layer that covers socket communication and real-time data handling (Chap‐
ter 7). On top of that, trading platforms and their APIs are required to be able to
place orders (Chapters 8 and 9). Finally, important aspects of automation and deploy‐
ment are covered (Chapter 10). In that sense, the main chapters of the book relate to
the layers as seen in Figure P-1, which provide a natural sequence for the topics to be
covered.

Figure P-1. The layers of Python for algorithmic trading

Preface

|

xiii

Who This Book Is For
This book is for students, academics, and practitioners alike who want to apply
Python in the fascinating field of algorithmic trading. The book assumes that the
reader has, at least on a fundamental level, background knowledge in both Python
programming and in financial trading. For reference and review, the Appendix intro‐
duces important Python, NumPy, matplotlib, and pandas topics. The following are
good references to get a sound understanding of the Python topics important for this
book. Most readers will benefit from having at least access to Hilpisch (2018) for ref‐
erence. With regard to the machine and deep learning approaches applied to algorith‐
mic trading, Hilpisch (2020) provides a wealth of background information and a
larger number of specific examples. Background information about Python as applied
to finance, financial data science, and artificial intelligence can be found in the
following books:
Hilpisch, Yves. 2018. Python for Finance: Mastering Data-Driven Finance. 2nd ed.
Sebastopol: O’Reilly.
⸻. 2020. Artificial Intelligence in Finance: A Python-Based Guide. Sebastopol:
O’Reilly.
McKinney, Wes. 2017. Python for Data Analysis: Data Wrangling with Pandas,
NumPy, and IPython. 2nd ed. Sebastopol: O’Reilly.
Ramalho, Luciano. 2021. Fluent Python: Clear, Concise, and Effective Programming.
2nd ed. Sebastopol: O’Reilly.
VanderPlas, Jake. 2016. Python Data Science Handbook: Essential Tools for Working
with Data. Sebastopol: O’Reilly.
Background information about algorithmic trading can be found, for instance, in
these books:
Chan, Ernest. 2009. Quantitative Trading: How to Build Your Own Algorithmic Trad‐
ing Business. Hoboken et al: John Wiley & Sons.
Chan, Ernest. 2013. Algorithmic Trading: Winning Strategies and Their Rationale.
Hoboken et al: John Wiley & Sons.
Kissel, Robert. 2013. The Science of Algorithmic Trading and Portfolio Management.
Amsterdam et al: Elsevier/Academic Press.
Narang, Rishi. 2013. Inside the Black Box: A Simple Guide to Quantitative and High
Frequency Trading. Hoboken et al: John Wiley & Sons.
Enjoy your journey through the algorithmic trading world with Python and get in
touch by emailing py4at@tpq.io if you have questions or comments.

xiv

|

Preface

Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.
Constant width

Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs, to refer to program ele‐
ments such as variable or function names, databases, data types, environment
variables, statements, and keywords.
Constant width bold

Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.
Constant width italic

Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by values deter‐
mined by context.
This element signifies a tip or suggestion.

This element signifies a general note.

This element indicates a warning or caution.

Using Code Examples
You can access and execute the code that accompanies the book on the Quant Plat‐
form at https://py4at.pqp.io, for which only a free registration is required.
If you have a technical question or a problem using the code examples, please email
bookquestions@oreilly.com.
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, if example code is offered
with this book, you may use it in your programs and documentation. You do not

Preface

|

xv

need to contact us for permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion of
the code. For example, writing a program that uses several chunks of code from this
book does not require permission. Selling or distributing examples from O’Reilly
books does require permission. Answering a question by citing this book and quoting
example code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant amount
of example code from this book into your product’s documentation does require
permission.
We appreciate, but generally do not require, attribution. An attribution usually
includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example, this book may be attrib‐
uted as: “Python for Algorithmic Trading by Yves Hilpisch (O’Reilly). Copyright 2021
Yves Hilpisch, 978-1-492-05335-4.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given
above, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.

O’Reilly Online Learning
For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technol‐
ogy and business training, knowledge, and insight to help
companies succeed.
Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and expertise
through books, articles, and our online learning platform. O’Reilly’s online learning
platform gives you on-demand access to live training courses, in-depth learning
paths, interactive coding environments, and a vast collection of text and video from
O’Reilly and 200+ other publishers. For more information, visit http://oreilly.com.

How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at https://oreil.ly/py4at.

xvi

|

Preface

Email bookquestions@oreilly.com to comment or ask technical questions about this
book.
For news and information about our books and courses, visit http://oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://youtube.com/oreillymedia

Acknowledgments
I want to thank the technical reviewers—Hugh Brown, McKlayne Marshall, Ramana‐
than Ramakrishnamoorthy, and Prem Jebaseelan—who provided helpful comments
that led to many improvements of the book’s content.
As usual, a special thank you goes to Michael Schwed, who supports me in all techni‐
cal matters, simple and highly complex, with his broad and in-depth technology
know-how.
Delegates of the Certificate Programs in Python for Computational Finance and
Algorithmic Trading also helped improve this book. Their ongoing feedback has
enabled me to weed out errors and mistakes and refine the code and notebooks used
in our online training classes and now, finally, in this book.
I would also like to thank the whole team at O’Reilly Media—especially Michelle
Smith, Michele Cronin, Victoria DeRose, and Danny Elfanbaum—for making it all
happen and helping me refine the book in so many ways.
Of course, all remaining errors are mine alone.
Furthermore, I would also like to thank the team at Refinitiv—in particular, Jason
Ramchandani—for providing ongoing support and access to financial data. The
major data files used throughout the book and made available to the readers were
received in one way or another from Refinitiv’s data APIs.
To my family with love. I dedicate this book to my father Adolf whose support for me
and our family now spans almost five decades.

Preface

|

xvii

CHAPTER 1

Python and Algorithmic Trading

At Goldman [Sachs] the number of people engaged in trading shares has fallen from a peak
of 600 in 2000 to just two today.1
—The Economist

This chapter provides background information for, and an overview of, the topics
covered in this book. Although Python for algorithmic trading is a niche at the inter‐
section of Python programming and finance, it is a fast-growing one that touches on
such diverse topics as Python deployment, interactive financial analytics, machine
and deep learning, object-oriented programming, socket communication, visualiza‐
tion of streaming data, and trading platforms.
For a quick refresher on important Python topics, read the Appendix first.

Python for Finance
The Python programming language originated in 1991 with the first release by Guido
van Rossum of a version labeled 0.9.0. In 1994, version 1.0 followed. However, it took
almost two decades for Python to establish itself as a major programming language
and technology platform in the financial industry. Of course, there were early adopt‐
ers, mainly hedge funds, but widespread adoption probably started only around 2011.
One major obstacle to the adoption of Python in the financial industry has been the
fact that the default Python version, called CPython, is an interpreted, high-level lan‐
guage. Numerical algorithms in general and financial algorithms in particular are
quite often implemented based on (nested) loop structures. While compiled, lowlevel languages like C or C++ are really fast at executing such loops, Python, which

1 “Too Squid to Fail.” The Economist, 29. October 2016.

1

relies on interpretation instead of compilation, is generally quite slow at doing so. As
a consequence, pure Python proved too slow for many real-world financial applica‐
tions, such as option pricing or risk management.

Python Versus Pseudo-Code
Although Python was never specifically targeted towards the scientific and financial
communities, many people from these fields nevertheless liked the beauty and con‐
ciseness of its syntax. Not too long ago, it was generally considered good tradition to
explain a (financial) algorithm and at the same time present some pseudo-code as an
intermediate step towards its proper technological implementation. Many felt that,
with Python, the pseudo-code step would not be necessary anymore. And they were
proven mostly correct.
Consider, for instance, the Euler discretization of the geometric Brownian motion, as
in Equation 1-1.
Equation 1-1. Euler discretization of geometric Brownian motion
ST = S0 exp r − 0 . 5σ 2 T + σz T

For decades, the LaTeX markup language and compiler have been the gold standard
for authoring scientific documents containing mathematical formulae. In many ways,
Latex syntax is similar to or already like pseudo-code when, for example, laying out
equations, as in Equation 1-1. In this particular case, the Latex version looks like this:
S_T = S_0 \exp((r - 0.5 \sigma^2) T + \sigma z \sqrt{T})

In Python, this translates to executable code, given respective variable definitions,
that is also really close to the financial formula as well as to the Latex representation:
S_T = S_0 * exp((r - 0.5 * sigma ** 2) * T + sigma * z * sqrt(T))

However, the speed issue remains. Such a difference equation, as a numerical approx‐
imation of the respective stochastic differential equation, is generally used to price
derivatives by Monte Carlo simulation or to do risk analysis and management based
on simulation.2 These tasks in turn can require millions of simulations that need to be
finished in due time, often in almost real-time or at least near-time. Python, as an
interpreted high-level programming language, was never designed to be fast enough
to tackle such computationally demanding tasks.

2 For details, see Hilpisch (2018, ch. 12).

2

|

Chapter 1: Python and Algorithmic Trading

NumPy and Vectorization
In 2006, version 1.0 of the NumPy Python package was released by Travis Oliphant.
NumPy stands for numerical Python, suggesting that it targets scenarios that are
numerically demanding. The base Python interpreter tries to be as general as possible
in many areas, which often leads to quite a bit of overhead at run-time.3 NumPy, on the
other hand, uses specialization as its major approach to avoid overhead and to be as
good and as fast as possible in certain application scenarios.
The major class of NumPy is the regular array object, called ndarray object for ndimensional array. It is immutable, which means that it cannot be changed in size,
and can only accommodate a single data type, called dtype. This specialization allows
for the implementation of concise and fast code. One central approach in this context
is vectorization. Basically, this approach avoids looping on the Python level and dele‐
gates the looping to specialized NumPy code, generally implemented in C and there‐
fore rather fast.
Consider the simulation of 1,000,000 end of period values ST according to Equation
1-1 with pure Python. The major part of the following code is a for loop with
1,000,000 iterations:
In [1]: %%time
import random
from math import exp, sqrt
S0 = 100
r = 0.05
T = 1.0
sigma = 0.2
values = []
for _ in range(1000000):
ST = S0 * exp((r - 0.5 * sigma ** 2) * T +
sigma * random.gauss(0, 1) * sqrt(T))
values.append(ST)
CPU times: user 1.13 s, sys: 21.7 ms, total: 1.15 s
Wall time: 1.15 s

The initial index level.
The constant short rate.

3 For example, list objects are not only mutable, which means that they can be changed in size, but they can

also contain almost any other kind of Python object, like int, float, tuple objects or list objects themselves.

Python for Finance

|

3

The time horizon in year fractions.
The constant volatility factor.
An empty list object to collect simulated values.
The main for loop.
The simulation of a single end-of-period value.
Appends the simulated value to the list object.
With NumPy, you can avoid looping on the Python level completely by the use of vec‐
torization. The code is much more concise, more readable, and faster by a factor of
about eight:
In [2]: %%time
import numpy as np
S0 = 100
r = 0.05
T = 1.0
sigma = 0.2
ST = S0 * np.exp((r - 0.5 * sigma ** 2) * T +
sigma * np.random.standard_normal(1000000) *
np.sqrt(T))
CPU times: user 375 ms, sys: 82.6 ms, total: 458 ms
Wall time: 160 ms

This single line of NumPy code simulates all the values and stores them in an

ndarray object.

Vectorization is a powerful concept for writing concise, easy-toread, and easy-to-maintain code in finance and algorithmic trad‐
ing. With NumPy, vectorized code does not only make code more
concise, but it also can speed up code execution considerably (by a
factor of about eight in the Monte Carlo simulation, for example).

It’s safe to say that NumPy has significantly contributed to the success of Python in sci‐
ence and finance. Many other popular Python packages from the so-called scientific
Python stack build on NumPy as an efficient, performing data structure to store and
handle numerical data. In fact, NumPy is an outgrowth of the SciPy package project,
which provides a wealth of functionality frequently needed in science. The SciPy
project recognized the need for a more powerful numerical data structure and

4

|

Chapter 1: Python and Algorithmic Trading

consolidated older projects like Numeric and NumArray in this area into a new, unify‐
ing one in the form of NumPy.
In algorithmic trading, a Monte Carlo simulation might not be the most important
use case for a programming language. However, if you enter the algorithmic trading
space, the management of larger, or even big, financial time series data sets is a very
important use case. Just think of the backtesting of (intraday) trading strategies or the
processing of tick data streams during trading hours. This is where the pandas data
analysis package comes into play.

pandas and the DataFrame Class
Development of pandas began in 2008 by Wes McKinney, who back then was work‐
ing at AQR Capital Management, a big hedge fund operating out of Greenwich, Con‐
necticut. As with for any other hedge fund, working with time series data is of
paramount importance for AQR Capital Management, but back then Python did not
provide any kind of appealing support for this type of data. Wes’s idea was to create a
package that mimics the capabilities of the R statistical language (http://r-project.org)
in this area. This is reflected, for example, in naming the major class DataFrame,
whose counterpart in R is called data.frame. Not being considered close enough to
the core business of money management, AQR Capital Management open sourced
the pandas project in 2009, which marks the beginning of a major success story in
open source–based data and financial analytics.
Partly due to pandas, Python has become a major force in data and financial analyt‐
ics. Many people who adopt Python, coming from diverse other languages, cite
pandas as a major reason for their decision. In combination with open data sources
like Quandl, pandas even allows students to do sophisticated financial analytics with
the lowest barriers of entry ever: a regular notebook computer with an internet con‐
nection suffices.
Assume an algorithmic trader is interested in trading Bitcoin, the cryptocurrency
with the largest market capitalization. A first step might be to retrieve data about the
historical exchange rate in USD. Using Quandl data and pandas, such a task is accom‐
plished in less than a minute. Figure 1-1 shows the plot that results from the follow‐
ing Python code, which is (omitting some plotting style related parameterizations)
only four lines. Although pandas is not explicitly imported, the Quandl Python wrap‐
per package by default returns a DataFrame object that is then used to add a simple
moving average (SMA) of 100 days, as well as to visualize the raw data alongside
the SMA:
In [3]: %matplotlib inline
from pylab import mpl, plt
plt.style.use('seaborn')
mpl.rcParams['savefig.dpi'] = 300

Python for Finance

|

5

mpl.rcParams['font.family'] = 'serif'
In [4]: import configparser
c = configparser.ConfigParser()
c.read('../pyalgo.cfg')
Out[4]: ['../pyalgo.cfg']
In [5]: import quandl as q
q.ApiConfig.api_key = c['quandl']['api_key']
d = q.get('BCHAIN/MKPRU')
d['SMA'] = d['Value'].rolling(100).mean()
d.loc['2013-1-1':].plot(title='BTC/USD exchange rate',
figsize=(10, 6));

Imports and configures the plotting package.
Imports the configparser module and reads credentials.
Imports the Quandl Python wrapper package and provides the API key.
Retrieves daily data for the Bitcoin exchange rate and returns a pandas Data

Frame object with a single column.

Calculates the SMA for 100 days in vectorized fashion.
Selects data from the 1st of January 2013 on and plots it.
Obviously, NumPy and pandas measurably contribute to the success of Python in
finance. However, the Python ecosystem has much more to offer in the form of addi‐
tional Python packages that solve rather fundamental problems and sometimes speci‐
alized ones. This book will make use of packages for data retrieval and storage (for
example, PyTables, TsTables, SQLite) and for machine and deep learning (for exam‐
ple, scikit-learn, TensorFlow), to name just two categories. Along the way, we will
also implement classes and modules that will make any algorithmic trading project
more efficient. However, the main packages used throughout will be NumPy and
pandas.

6

|

Chapter 1: Python and Algorithmic Trading

Figure 1-1. Historical Bitcoin exchange rate in USD from the beginning of 2013 until
mid-2020
While NumPy provides the basic data structure to store numerical
data and work with it, pandas brings powerful time series manage‐
ment capabilities to the table. It also does a great job of wrapping
functionality from other packages into an easy-to-use API. The Bit‐
coin example just described shows that a single method call on a
DataFrame object is enough to generate a plot with two financial
time series visualized. Like NumPy, pandas allows for rather concise,
vectorized code that is also generally executed quite fast due to
heavy use of compiled code under the hood.

Algorithmic Trading
The term algorithmic trading is neither uniquely nor universally defined. On a rather
basic level, it refers to the trading of financial instruments based on some formal
algorithm. An algorithm is a set of operations (mathematical, technical) to be conduc‐
ted in a certain sequence to achieve a certain goal. For example, there are mathemati‐
cal algorithms to solve a Rubik’s Cube.4 Such an algorithm can solve the problem at
hand via a step-by-step procedure, often perfectly. Another example is algorithms for

4 See The Mathematics of the Rubik’s Cube or Algorithms for Solving Rubik’s Cube.

Algorithmic Trading

|

7

finding the root(s) of an equation if it (they) exist(s) at all. In that sense, the objective
of a mathematical algorithm is often well specified and an optimal solution is often
expected.
But what about the objective of financial trading algorithms? This question is not that
easy to answer in general. It might help to step back for a moment and consider gen‐
eral motives for trading. In Dorn et al. (2008) write:
Trading in financial markets is an important economic activity. Trades are necessary to
get into and out of the market, to put unneeded cash into the market, and to convert
back into cash when the money is wanted. They are also needed to move money
around within the market, to exchange one asset for another, to manage risk, and to
exploit information about future price movements.

The view expressed here is more technical than economic in nature, focusing mainly
on the process itself and only partly on why people initiate trades in the first place.
For our purposes, a nonexhaustive list of financial trading motives of people and
financial institutions managing money of their own or for others includes the
following:
Beta trading
Earning market risk premia by investing in, for instance, exchange traded funds
(ETFs) that replicate the performance of the S&P 500.
Alpha generation
Earning risk premia independent of the market by, for example, selling short
stocks listed in the S&P 500 or ETFs on the S&P 500.
Static hedging
Hedging against market risks by buying, for example, out-of-the-money put
options on the S&P 500.
Dynamic hedging
Hedging against market risks affecting options on the S&P 500 by, for example,
dynamically trading futures on the S&P 500 and appropriate cash, money mar‐
ket, or rate instruments.
Asset-liability management
Trading S&P 500 stocks and ETFs to be able to cover liabilities resulting from, for
example, writing life insurance policies.
Market making
Providing, for example, liquidity to options on the S&P 500 by buying and selling
options at different bid and ask prices.
All these types of trades can be implemented by a discretionary approach,
with human traders making decisions mainly on their own, as well as based on algo‐
rithms supporting the human trader or even replacing them completely in the
8

|

Chapter 1: Python and Algorithmic Trading

decision-making process. In this context, computerization of financial trading of
course plays an important role. While in the beginning of financial trading, floor
trading with a large group of people shouting at each other (“open outcry”) was the
only way of executing trades, computerization and the advent of the internet and web
technologies have revolutionized trading in the financial industry. The quotation at
the beginning of this chapter illustrates this impressively in terms of the number of
people actively engaged in trading shares at Goldman Sachs in 2000 and in 2016. It is
a trend that was foreseen 25 years ago, as Solomon and Corso (1991) point out:
Computers have revolutionized the trading of securities and the stock market is cur‐
rently in the midst of a dynamic transformation. It is clear that the market of the future
will not resemble the markets of the past.
Technology has made it possible for information regarding stock prices to be sent all
over the world in seconds. Presently, computers route orders and execute small trades
directly from the brokerage firm’s terminal to the exchange. Computers now link
together various stock exchanges, a practice which is helping to create a single global
market for the trading of securities. The continuing improvements in technology will
make it possible to execute trades globally by electronic trading systems.

Interestingly, one of the oldest and most widely used algorithms is found in dynamic
hedging of options. Already with the publication of the seminal papers about the
pricing of European options by Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973), the
algorithm, called delta hedging, was made available long before computerized and
electronic trading even started. Delta hedging as a trading algorithm shows how to
hedge away all market risks in a simplified, perfect, continuous model world. In the
real world, with transaction costs, discrete trading, imperfectly liquid markets, and
other frictions (“imperfections”), the algorithm has proven, somewhat surprisingly
maybe, its usefulness and robustness, as well. It might not allow one to perfectly
hedge away market risks affecting options, but it is useful in getting close to the ideal
and is therefore still used on a large scale in the financial industry.5
This book focuses on algorithmic trading in the context of alpha generating strategies.
Although there are more sophisticated definitions for alpha, for the purposes of this
book, alpha is seen as the difference between a trading strategy’s return over some
period of time and the return of the benchmark (single stock, index, cryptocurrency,
etc.). For example, if the S&P 500 returns 10% in 2018 and an algorithmic strategy
returns 12%, then alpha is +2% points. If the strategy returns 7%, then alpha is -3%
points. In general, such numbers are not adjusted for risk, and other risk characteris‐
tics, such as maximal drawdown (period), are usually considered to be of second
order importance, if at all.

5 See Hilpisch (2015) for a detailed analysis of delta hedging strategies for European and American options

using Python.

Algorithmic Trading

|

9

This book focuses on alpha-generating strategies, or strategies that
try to generate positive returns (above a benchmark) independent
of the market’s performance. Alpha is defined in this book (in the
simplest way) as the excess return of a strategy over the benchmark
financial instrument’s performance.

There are other areas where trading-related algorithms play an important role. One is
the high frequency trading (HFT) space, where speed is typically the discipline in
which players compete.6 The motives for HFT are diverse, but market making and
alpha generation probably play a prominent role. Another one is trade execution,
where algorithms are deployed to optimally execute certain nonstandard trades.
Motives in this area might include the execution (at best possible prices) of large
orders or the execution of an order with as little market and price impact as possible.
A more subtle motive might be to disguise an order by executing it on a number of
different exchanges.
An important question remains to be addressed: is there any advantage to using algo‐
rithms for trading instead of human research, experience, and discretion? This ques‐
tion can hardly be answered in any generality. For sure, there are human traders and
portfolio managers who have earned, on average, more than their benchmark for
investors over longer periods of time. The paramount example in this regard is War‐
ren Buffett. On the other hand, statistical analyses show that the majority of active
portfolio managers rarely beat relevant benchmarks consistently. Referring to the year
2015, Adam Shell writes:
Last year, for example, when the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index posted a paltry
total return of 1.4% with dividends included, 66% of “actively managed” largecompany stock funds posted smaller returns than the index…The longer-term outlook
is just as gloomy, with 84% of large-cap funds generating lower returns than the S&P
500 in the latest five year period and 82% falling shy in the past 10 years, the study
found.7

In an empirical study published in December 2016, Harvey et al. write:
We analyze and contrast the performance of discretionary and systematic hedge funds.
Systematic funds use strategies that are rules‐based, with little or no daily intervention
by humans….We find that, for the period 1996‐2014, systematic equity managers
underperform their discretionary counterparts in terms of unadjusted (raw) returns,
but that after adjusting for exposures to well‐known risk factors, the risk‐adjusted per‐
formance is similar. In the case of macro, systematic funds outperform discretionary
funds, both on an unadjusted and risk‐adjusted basis.

6 See the book by Lewis (2015) for a non-technical introduction to HFT.
7 Source: “66% of Fund Managers Can’t Match S&P Results.” USA Today, March 14, 2016.

10

|

Chapter 1: Python and Algorithmic Trading

Table 1-0 reproduces the major quantitative findings of the study by Harvey et al.
(2016).8 In the table, factors include traditional ones (equity, bonds, etc.), dynamic
ones (value, momentum, etc.), and volatility (buying at-the-money puts and calls).
The adjusted return appraisal ratio divides alpha by the adjusted return volatility. For
more details and background, see the original study.
The study’s results illustrate that systematic (“algorithmic”) macro hedge funds per‐
form best as a category, both in unadjusted and risk-adjusted terms. They generate an
annualized alpha of 4.85% points over the period studied. These are hedge funds
implementing strategies that are typically global, are cross-asset, and often involve
political and macroeconomic elements. Systematic equity hedge funds only beat their
discretionary counterparts on the basis of the adjusted return appraisal ratio (0.35
versus 0.25).

Return average

Systematic macro Discretionary macro Systematic equity Discretionary equity
5.01%
2.86%
2.88%
4.09%
0.15%

1.28%

1.77%

2.86%

Adj. return average (alpha) 4.85%
0.93%
Adj. return volatility

1.57%

1.11%

1.22%

5.10%

3.18%

4.79%

0.44

0.31

0.35

0.25

Return attributed to
factors

Adj. return appraisal ratio

Compared to the S&P 500, hedge fund performance overall was quite meager for the
year 2017. While the S&P 500 index returned 21.8%, hedge funds only returned 8.5%
to investors (see this article in Investopedia). This illustrates how hard it is, even with
multimillion dollar budgets for research and technology, to generate alpha.

Python for Algorithmic Trading
Python is used in many corners of the financial industry but has become particularly
popular in the algorithmic trading space. There are a few good reasons for this:
Data analytics capabilities
A major requirement for every algorithmic trading project is the ability to man‐
age and process financial data efficiently. Python, in combination with packages
like NumPy and pandas, makes life easier in this regard for every algorithmic
trader than most other programming languages do.

8 Annualized performance (above the short-term interest rate) and risk measures for hedge fund categories

comprising a total of 9,000 hedge funds over the period from June 1996 to December 2014.

Python for Algorithmic Trading

|

11

Handling of modern APIs
Modern online trading platforms like the ones from FXCM and Oanda offer
RESTful application programming interfaces (APIs) and socket (streaming) APIs
to access historical and live data. Python is in general well suited to efficiently
interact with such APIs.
Dedicated packages
In addition to the standard data analytics packages, there are multiple packages
available that are dedicated to the algorithmic trading space, such as PyAlgoTrade
and Zipline for the backtesting of trading strategies and Pyfolio for performing
portfolio and risk analysis.
Vendor sponsored packages
More and more vendors in the space release open source Python packages to
facilitate access to their offerings. Among them are online trading platforms like
Oanda, as well as the leading data providers like Bloomberg and Refinitiv.
Dedicated platforms
Quantopian, for example, offers a standardized backtesting environment as a
Web-based platform where the language of choice is Python and where people
can exchange ideas with like-minded others via different social network features.
From its founding until 2020, Quantopian has attracted more than 300,000 users.
Buy- and sell-side adoption
More and more institutional players have adopted Python to streamline develop‐
ment efforts in their trading departments. This, in turn, requires more and more
staff proficient in Python, which makes learning Python a worthwhile
investment.
Education, training, and books
Prerequisites for the widespread adoption of a technology or programming lan‐
guage are academic and professional education and training programs in combi‐
nation with specialized books and other resources. The Python ecosystem has
seen a tremendous growth in such offerings recently, educating and training
more and more people in the use of Python for finance. This can be expected to
reinforce the trend of Python adoption in the algorithmic trading space.
In summary, it is rather safe to say that Python plays an important role in algorithmic
trading already and seems to have strong momentum to become even more impor‐
tant in the future. It is therefore a good choice for anyone trying to enter the space, be
it as an ambitious “retail” trader or as a professional employed by a leading financial
institution engaged in systematic trading.

12

|

Chapter 1: Python and Algorithmic Trading

Focus and Prerequisites
The focus of this book is on Python as a programming language for algorithmic trad‐
ing. The book assumes that the reader already has some experience with Python and
popular Python packages used for data analytics. Good introductory books are, for
example, Hilpisch (2018), McKinney (2017), and VanderPlas (2016), which all can be
consulted to build a solid foundation in Python for data analysis and finance. The
reader is also expected to have some experience with typical tools used for interactive
analytics with Python, such as IPython, to which VanderPlas (2016) also provides an
introduction.
This book presents and explains Python code that is applied to the topics at hand, like
backtesting trading strategies or working with streaming data. It cannot provide a
thorough introduction to all packages used in different places. It tries, however, to
highlight those capabilities of the packages that are central to the exposition (such as
vectorization with NumPy).
The book also cannot provide a thorough introduction and overview of all financial
and operational aspects relevant for algorithmic trading. The approach instead focu‐
ses on the use of Python to build the necessary infrastructure for automated algorith‐
mic trading systems. Of course, the majority of examples used are taken from the
algorithmic trading space. However, when dealing with, say, momentum or meanreversion strategies, they are more or less simply used without providing (statistical)
verification or an in-depth discussion of their intricacies. Whenever it seems appro‐
priate, references are given that point the reader to sources that address issues left
open during the exposition.
All in all, this book is written for readers who have some experience with both
Python and (algorithmic) trading. For such a reader, the book is a practical guide to
the creation of automated trading systems using Python and additional packages.
This book uses a number of Python programming approaches (for
example, object oriented programming) and packages (for exam‐
ple, scikit-learn) that cannot be explained in detail. The focus is
on applying these approaches and packages to different steps in an
algorithmic trading process. It is therefore recommended that
those who do not yet have enough Python (for finance) experience
additionally consult more introductory Python texts.

Trading Strategies
Throughout this book, four different algorithmic trading strategies are used as exam‐
ples. They are introduced briefly in the following sections and in some more detail
in Chapter 4. All these trading strategies can be classified as mainly alpha seeking
Focus and Prerequisites

|

13

strategies, since their main objective is to generate positive, above-market returns
independent of the market direction. Canonical examples throughout the book, when
it comes to financial instruments traded, are a stock index, a single stock, or a crypto‐
currency (denominated in a fiat currency). The book does not cover strategies involv‐
ing multiple financial instruments at the same time (pair trading strategies, strategies
based on baskets, etc.). It also covers only strategies whose trading signals are derived
from structured, financial time series data and not, for instance, from unstructured
data sources like news or social media feeds. This keeps the discussions and the
Python implementations concise and easier to understand, in line with the approach
(discussed earlier) of focusing on Python for algorithmic trading.9
The remainder of this chapter gives a quick overview of the four trading strategies
used in this book.

Simple Moving Averages
The first type of trading strategy relies on simple moving averages (SMAs) to gener‐
ate trading signals and market positionings. These trading strategies have been popu‐
larized by so-called technical analysts or chartists. The basic idea is that a shorterterm SMA being higher in value than a longer term SMA signals a long market
position and the opposite scenario signals a neutral or short market position.

Momentum
The basic idea behind momentum strategies is that a financial instrument is assumed
to perform in accordance with its recent performance for some additional time. For
example, when a stock index has seen a negative return on average over the last five
days, it is assumed that its performance will be negative tomorrow, as well.

Mean Reversion
In mean-reversion strategies, a financial instrument is assumed to revert to some
mean or trend level if it is currently far enough away from such a level. For example,
assume that a stock trades 10 USD under its 200 days SMA level of 100. It is then
expected that the stock price will return to its SMA level sometime soon.

9 See the book by Kissel (2013) for an overview of topics related to algorithmic trading, the book by Chan

(2013) for an in-depth discussion of momentum and mean-reversion strategies, or the book by Narang (2013)
for a coverage of quantitative and HFT trading in general.

14

|

Chapter 1: Python and Algorithmic Trading

Machine and Deep Learning
With machine and deep learning algorithms, one generally takes a more black box
approach to predicting market movements. For simplicity and reproducibility, the
examples in this book mainly rely on historical return observations as features to
train machine and deep learning algorithms to predict stock market movements.
This book does not introduce algorithmic trading in a systematic
fashion. Since the focus lies on applying Python in this fascinating
field, readers not familiar with algorithmic trading should consult
dedicated resources on the topic, some of which are cited in this
chapter and the chapters that follow. But be aware of the fact that
the algorithmic trading world in general is secretive and that
almost everyone who is successful is naturally reluctant to share
their secrets in order to protect their sources of success (that is,
their alpha).

Conclusions
Python is already a force in finance in general and is on its way to becoming a major
force in algorithmic trading. There are a number of good reasons to use Python for
algorithmic trading, among them the powerful ecosystem of packages that allows for
efficient data analysis or the handling of modern APIs. There are also a number of
good reasons to learn Python for algorithmic trading, chief among them the fact that
some of the biggest buy- and sell-side institutions make heavy use of Python in their
trading operations and constantly look for seasoned Python professionals.
This book focuses on applying Python to the different disciplines in algorithmic trad‐
ing, like backtesting trading strategies or interacting with online trading platforms. It
cannot replace a thorough introduction to Python itself nor to trading in general.
However, it systematically combines these two fascinating worlds to provide a valua‐
ble source for the generation of alpha in today’s competitive financial and cryptocur‐
rency markets.

References and Further Resources
Books and papers cited in this chapter:
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes. 1973. “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Lia‐
bilities.” Journal of Political Economy 81 (3): 638-659.
Chan, Ernest. 2013. Algorithmic Trading: Winning Strategies and Their Rationale.
Hoboken et al: John Wiley & Sons.

Conclusions

|

15

Dorn, Anne, Daniel Dorn, and Paul Sengmueller. 2008. “Why Do People Trade?”
Journal of Applied Finance (Fall/Winter): 37-50.
Harvey, Campbell, Sandy Rattray, Andrew Sinclair, and Otto Van Hemert. 2016.
“Man vs. Machine: Comparing Discretionary and Systematic Hedge Fund Perfor‐
mance.” The Journal of Portfolio Management White Paper, Man Group.
Hilpisch, Yves. 2015. Derivatives Analytics with Python: Data Analysis, Models, Simu‐
lation, Calibration and Hedging. Wiley Finance. Resources under http://
dawp.tpq.io.
⸻. 2018. Python for Finance: Mastering Data-Driven Finance. 2nd ed. Sebasto‐
pol: O’Reilly. Resources under https://py4fi.pqp.io.
⸻. 2020. Artificial Intelligence in Finance: A Python-Based Guide. Sebastopol:
O’Reilly. Resources under https://aiif.pqp.io.
Kissel, Robert. 2013. The Science of Algorithmic Trading and Portfolio Management.
Amsterdam et al: Elsevier/Academic Press.
Lewis, Michael. 2015. Flash Boys: Cracking the Money Code. New York, London: W.W.
Norton & Company.
McKinney, Wes. 2017. Python for Data Analysis: Data Wrangling with Pandas,
NumPy, and IPython. 2nd ed. Sebastopol: O’Reilly.
Merton, Robert. 1973. “Theory of Rational Option Pricing.” Bell Journal of Economics
and Management Science 4: 141-183.
Narang, Rishi. 2013. Inside the Black Box: A Simple Guide to Quantitative and High
Frequency Trading. Hoboken et al: John Wiley & Sons.
Solomon, Lewis, and Louise Corso. 1991. “The Impact of Technology on the Trading
of Securities: The Emerging Global Market and the Implications for Regulation.”
The John Marshall Law Review 24 (2): 299-338.
VanderPlas, Jake. 2016. Python Data Science Handbook: Essential Tools for Working
with Data. Sebastopol: O’Reilly.

16

|

Chapter 1: Python and Algorithmic Trading

CHAPTER 2

Python Infrastructure

In building a house, there is the problem of the selection of wood.
It is essential that the carpenter’s aim be to carry equipment that will cut well and, when he
has time, to sharpen that equipment.
—Miyamoto Musashi (The Book of Five Rings)

For someone new to Python, Python deployment might seem all but straightforward.
The same holds true for the wealth of libraries and packages that can be installed
optionally. First of all, there is not only one Python. Python comes in many different
flavors, like CPython, Jython, IronPython, or PyPy. Then there is still the divide
between Python 2.7 and the 3.x world. This chapter focuses on CPython, the most
popular version of the Python programming language, and on version 3.8.
Even when focusing on CPython 3.8 (henceforth just “Python”), deployment is made
difficult due to a number of reasons:
• The interpreter (a standard CPython installation) only comes with the so-called
standard library (e.g. covering typical mathematical functions).
• Optional Python packages need to be installed separately, and there are hundreds
of them.
• Compiling (“building”) such non-standard packages on your own can be tricky
due to dependencies and operating system–specific requirements.
• Taking care of such dependencies and of version consistency over time (mainte‐
nance) is often tedious and time consuming.
• Updates and upgrades for certain packages might cause the need for recompiling
a multitude of other packages.

17

• Changing or replacing one package might cause trouble in (many) other places.
• Migrating from one Python version to another one at some later point might
amplify all the preceding issues.
Fortunately, there are tools and strategies available that help with the Python deploy‐
ment issue. This chapter covers the following types of technologies that help with
Python deployment:
Package manager
Package managers like pip or conda help with the installing, updating, and
removing of Python packages. They also help with version consistency of differ‐
ent packages.
Virtual environment manager
A virtual environment manager like virtualenv or conda allows one to manage
multiple Python installations in parallel (for example, to have both a Python 2.7
and 3.8 installation on a single machine or to test the most recent development
version of a fancy Python package without risk).1
Container
Docker containers represent complete file systems containing all pieces of a sys‐
tem needed to run a certain software, such as code, runtime, or system tools. For
example, you can run a Ubuntu 20.04 operating system with a Python 3.8 instal‐
lation and the respective Python codes in a Docker container hosted on a
machine running Mac OS or Windows 10. Such a containerized environment can
then also be deployed later in the cloud without any major changes.
Cloud instance
Deploying Python code for financial applications generally requires high availa‐
bility, security, and performance. These requirements can typically be met only
by the use of professional compute and storage infrastructure that is nowadays
available at attractive conditions in the form of fairly small to really large and
powerful cloud instances. One benefit of a cloud instance (virtual server) com‐
pared to a dedicated server rented longer term is that users generally get charged
only for the hours of actual usage. Another advantage is that such cloud instances
are available literally in a minute or two if needed, which helps with agile devel‐
opment and scalability.
The structure of this chapter is as follows. “Conda as a Package Manager” on page 19
introduces conda as a package manager for Python. “Conda as a Virtual Environment

1 A recent project called pipenv combines the capabilities of the package manager pip with those of the virual

environment manager virtualenv. See https://github.com/pypa/pipenv.

18

|

Chapter 2: Python Infrastructure

Manager” on page 27 focuses on conda capabilities for virtual environment manage‐
ment. “Using Docker Containers” on page 30 gives a brief overview of Docker as a
containerization technology and focuses on the building of a Ubuntu-based container
with Python 3.8 installation. “Using Cloud Instances” on page 36 shows how to
deploy Python and Jupyter Lab, a powerful, browser-based tool suite for Python
development and deployment in the cloud.
The goal of this chapter is to have a proper Python installation with the most impor‐
tant tools, as well as numerical, data analysis, and visualization packages, available on
a professional infrastructure. This combination then serves as the backbone for
implementing and deploying the Python codes in later chapters, be it interactive
financial analytics code or code in the form of scripts and modules.

Conda as a Package Manager
Although conda can be installed alone, an efficient way of doing it is via Miniconda, a
minimal Python distribution that includes conda as a package and virtual environ‐
ment manager.

Installing Miniconda
You can download the different versions of Miniconda on the Miniconda page. In
what follows, the Python 3.8 64-bit version is assumed, which is available for Linux,
Windows, and Mac OS. The main example in this sub-section is a session in an
Ubuntu-based Docker container, which downloads the Linux 64-bit installer via wget
and then installs Miniconda. The code as shown should work (with maybe minor
modifications) on any other Linux-based or Mac OS–based machine, as well:2
$ docker run -ti -h pyalgo -p 11111:11111 ubuntu:latest /bin/bash
root@pyalgo:/# apt-get update; apt-get upgrade -y
...
root@pyalgo:/# apt-get install -y gcc wget
...
root@pyalgo:/# cd root
root@pyalgo:~# wget \
> https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh \
> -O miniconda.sh
...
HTTP request sent, awaiting response... 200 OK
Length: 93052469 (89M) [application/x-sh]
Saving to: 'miniconda.sh'

2 On Windows, you can also run the exact same commands in a Docker container (see https://oreil.ly/GndRR).

Working on Windows directly requires some adjustments. See, for example, the book by Matthias and Kane
(2018) for further details on Docker usage.

Conda as a Package Manager

|

19

miniconda.sh

100%[============>]

88.74M

1.60MB/s

in 2m 15s

2020-08-25 11:01:54 (3.08 MB/s) - 'miniconda.sh' saved [93052469/93052469]
root@pyalgo:~# bash miniconda.sh
Welcome to Miniconda3 py38_4.8.3
In order to continue the installation process, please review the license
agreement.
Please, press ENTER to continue
>>>

Simply pressing the ENTER key starts the installation process. After reviewing the
license agreement, approve the terms by answering yes:
...
Last updated February 25, 2020
Do you accept the license terms? [yes|no]
[no] >>> yes
Miniconda3 will now be installed into this location:
/root/miniconda3
- Press ENTER to confirm the location
- Press CTRL-C to abort the installation
- Or specify a different location below
[/root/miniconda3] >>>
PREFIX=/root/miniconda3
Unpacking payload ...
Collecting package metadata (current_repodata.json): done
Solving environment: done
## Package Plan ##
environment location: /root/miniconda3
...
python
pkgs/main/linux-64::python-3.8.3-hcff3b4d_0
...
Preparing transaction: done
Executing transaction: done
installation finished.

After you have agreed to the licensing terms and have confirmed the install location,
you should allow Miniconda to prepend the new Miniconda install location to the
PATH environment variable by answering yes once again:
Do you wish the installer to initialize Miniconda3
by running conda init? [yes|no]
[no] >>> yes

20

|

Chapter 2: Python Infrastructure

...
no change
modified

/root/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.csh
/root/.bashrc

==> For changes to take effect, close and re-open your current shell. <==
If you'd prefer that conda's base environment not be activated on startup,
set the auto_activate_base parameter to false:
conda config --set auto_activate_base false
Thank you for installing Miniconda3!
root@pyalgo:~#

After that, you might want to update conda since the Miniconda installer is in general
not as regularly updated as conda itself:
root@pyalgo:~# export PATH="/root/miniconda3/bin/:$PATH"
root@pyalgo:~# conda update -y conda
...
root@pyalgo:~# echo ". /root/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh" >> ~/.bashrc
root@pyalgo:~# bash
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

After this rather simple installation procedure, there are now both a basic Python
installation and conda available. The basic Python installation comes already with
some nice batteries included, like the SQLite3 database engine. You might try out
whether you can start Python in a new shell instance or after appending the relevant
path to the respective environment variable (as done in the preceding example):
(base) root@pyalgo:~# python
Python 3.8.3 (default, May 19 2020, 18:47:26)
[GCC 7.3.0] :: Anaconda, Inc. on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> print('Hello Python for Algorithmic Trading World.')
Hello Python for Algorithmic Trading World.
>>> exit()
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

Basic Operations with Conda
conda can be used to efficiently handle, among other things, the installation, updat‐
ing, and removal of Python packages. The following list provides an overview of the
major functions:

Installing Python x.x
conda install python=x.x
Updating Python
conda update python

Conda as a Package Manager

|

21

Installing a package
conda install $PACKAGE_NAME
Updating a package
conda update $PACKAGE_NAME
Removing a package
conda remove $PACKAGE_NAME
Updating conda itself
conda update conda
Searching for packages
conda search $SEARCH_TERM
Listing installed packages
conda list
Given these capabilities, installing, for example, NumPy (as one of the most important
packages of the so-called scientific stack) is a single command only. When the installa‐
tion takes place on a machine with an Intel processor, the procedure automatically
installs the Intel Math Kernel Library mkl, which speeds up numerical operations not
only for NumPy on Intel machines but also for a few other scientific Python packages:3
(base) root@pyalgo:~# conda install numpy
Collecting package metadata (current_repodata.json): done
Solving environment: done
## Package Plan ##
environment location: /root/miniconda3
added / updated specs:
- numpy

The following packages will be downloaded:
package
|
build
---------------------------|----------------blas-1.0
|
mkl
intel-openmp-2020.1
|
217
mkl-2020.1
|
217
mkl-service-2.3.0
|
py38he904b0f_0
mkl_fft-1.1.0
|
py38h23d657b_0

6 KB
780 KB
129.0 MB
62 KB
150 KB

3 Installing the meta package nomkl, such as in conda install numpy nomkl, avoids the automatic installation

and usage of mkl and related other packages.

22

|

Chapter 2: Python Infrastructure

mkl_random-1.1.1
|
py38h0573a6f_0
341 KB
numpy-1.19.1
|
py38hbc911f0_0
21 KB
numpy-base-1.19.1
|
py38hfa32c7d_0
4.2 MB
-----------------------------------------------------------Total:
134.5 MB
The following NEW packages will be INSTALLED:
blas
intel-openmp
mkl
mkl-service
mkl_fft
mkl_random
numpy
numpy-base

pkgs/main/linux-64::blas-1.0-mkl
pkgs/main/linux-64::intel-openmp-2020.1-217
pkgs/main/linux-64::mkl-2020.1-217
pkgs/main/linux-64::mkl-service-2.3.0-py38he904b0f_0
pkgs/main/linux-64::mkl_fft-1.1.0-py38h23d657b_0
pkgs/main/linux-64::mkl_random-1.1.1-py38h0573a6f_0
pkgs/main/linux-64::numpy-1.19.1-py38hbc911f0_0
pkgs/main/linux-64::numpy-base-1.19.1-py38hfa32c7d_0

Proceed ([y]/n)? y

Downloading and Extracting Packages
numpy-base-1.19.1
| 4.2 MB
| ############################## | 100%
blas-1.0
| 6 KB
| ############################## | 100%
mkl_fft-1.1.0
| 150 KB
| ############################## | 100%
mkl-service-2.3.0
| 62 KB
| ############################## | 100%
numpy-1.19.1
| 21 KB
| ############################## | 100%
mkl-2020.1
| 129.0 MB | ############################## | 100%
mkl_random-1.1.1
| 341 KB
| ############################## | 100%
intel-openmp-2020.1 | 780 KB
| ############################## | 100%
Preparing transaction: done
Verifying transaction: done
Executing transaction: done
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

Conda as a Package Manager

|

23

Multiple packages can also be installed at once. The -y flag indicates that all (poten‐
tial) questions shall be answered with yes:
(base) root@pyalgo:~# conda install -y ipython matplotlib pandas \
> pytables scikit-learn scipy
...
Collecting package metadata (current_repodata.json): done
Solving environment: done
## Package Plan ##
environment location: /root/miniconda3
added / updated specs:
- ipython
- matplotlib
- pandas
- pytables
- scikit-learn
- scipy

The following packages will be downloaded:
package
|
build
---------------------------|----------------backcall-0.2.0
|
py_0
15 KB
...
zstd-1.4.5
|
h9ceee32_0
619 KB
-----------------------------------------------------------Total:
144.9 MB
The following NEW packages will be INSTALLED:
backcall
blosc
...
zstd

pkgs/main/noarch::backcall-0.2.0-py_0
pkgs/main/linux-64::blosc-1.20.0-hd408876_0
pkgs/main/linux-64::zstd-1.4.5-h9ceee32_0

Downloading and Extracting Packages
glib-2.65.0
| 2.9 MB
| ############################## | 100%
...
snappy-1.1.8
| 40 KB
| ############################## | 100%
Preparing transaction: done
Verifying transaction: done
Executing transaction: done
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

24

|

Chapter 2: Python Infrastructure

After the resulting installation procedure, some of the most important libraries for
financial analytics are available in addition to the standard ones:
IPython
An improved interactive Python shell
matplotlib
The standard plotting library for Python
NumPy
Efficient handling of numerical arrays
pandas
Management of tabular data, like financial time series data
PyTables
A Python wrapper for the HDF5 library
scikit-learn
A package for machine learning and related tasks
SciPy
A collection of scientific classes and functions
This provides a basic tool set for data analysis in general and financial analytics in
particular. The next example uses IPython and draws a set of pseudo-random num‐
bers with NumPy:
(base) root@pyalgo:~# ipython
Python 3.8.3 (default, May 19 2020, 18:47:26)
Type 'copyright', 'credits' or 'license' for more information
IPython 7.16.1 -- An enhanced Interactive Python. Type '?' for help.
In [1]: import numpy as np
In [2]: np.random.seed(100)
In [3]: np.random.standard_normal((5, 4))
Out[3]:
array([[-1.74976547, 0.3426804 , 1.1530358 , -0.25243604],
[ 0.98132079, 0.51421884, 0.22117967, -1.07004333],
[-0.18949583, 0.25500144, -0.45802699, 0.43516349],
[-0.58359505, 0.81684707, 0.67272081, -0.10441114],
[-0.53128038, 1.02973269, -0.43813562, -1.11831825]])
In [4]: exit
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

Conda as a Package Manager

|

25

Executing conda list shows which packages are installed:
(base) root@pyalgo:~# conda list
# packages in environment at /root/miniconda3:
#
# Name
Version
Build Channel
_libgcc_mutex
0.1
main
backcall
0.2.0
py_0
blas
1.0
mkl
blosc
1.20.0
hd408876_0
...
zlib
1.2.11
h7b6447c_3
zstd
1.4.5
h9ceee32_0
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

In case a package is not needed anymore, it is efficiently removed with conda remove:
(base) root@pyalgo:~# conda remove matplotlib
Collecting package metadata (repodata.json): done
Solving environment: done
## Package Plan ##
environment location: /root/miniconda3
removed specs:
- matplotlib

The following packages will be REMOVED:
The following packages will be REMOVED:
cycler-0.10.0-py38_0
...
tornado-6.0.4-py38h7b6447c_1

Proceed ([y]/n)? y
Preparing transaction: done
Verifying transaction: done
Executing transaction: done
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

conda as a package manager is already quite useful. However, its full power only

becomes evident when adding virtual environment management to the mix.

26

|

Chapter 2: Python Infrastructure

conda as a package manager makes installing, updating, and

removing Python packages a pleasant experience. There is no need
to take care of building and compiling packages on your own,
which can be tricky sometimes given the list of dependencies a
package specifies and given the specifics to be considered on differ‐
ent operating systems.

Conda as a Virtual Environment Manager
Having installed Miniconda with conda included provides a default Python installa‐
tion depending on what version of Miniconda has been chosen. The virtual environ‐
ment management capabilities of conda allow one, for example, to add to a Python
3.8 default installation a completely separated installation of Python 2.7.x. To this
end, conda offers the following functionality:
Creating a virtual environment
conda create --name $ENVIRONMENT_NAME
Activating an environment
conda activate $ENVIRONMENT_NAME
Deactivating an environment
conda deactivate $ENVIRONMENT_NAME
Removing an environment
conda env remove --name $ENVIRONMENT_NAME
Exporting to an environment file
conda env export > $FILE_NAME
Creating an environment from a file
conda env create -f $FILE_NAME
Listing all environments
conda info --envs
As a simple illustration, the example code that follows creates an environment called
py27, installs IPython, and executes a line of Python 2.7.x code. Although the support
for Python 2.7 has ended, the example illustrates how legacy Python 2.7 code can
easily be executed and tested:
(base) root@pyalgo:~# conda create --name py27 python=2.7
Collecting package metadata (current_repodata.json): done
Solving environment: failed with repodata from current_repodata.json,
will retry with next repodata source.
Collecting package metadata (repodata.json): done
Solving environment: done

Conda as a Virtual Environment Manager

|

27

## Package Plan ##
environment location: /root/miniconda3/envs/py27
added / updated specs:
- python=2.7

The following packages will be downloaded:
package
|
build
---------------------------|----------------certifi-2019.11.28
|
py27_0
153 KB
pip-19.3.1
|
py27_0
1.7 MB
python-2.7.18
|
h15b4118_1
9.9 MB
setuptools-44.0.0
|
py27_0
512 KB
wheel-0.33.6
|
py27_0
42 KB
-----------------------------------------------------------Total:
12.2 MB
The following NEW packages will be INSTALLED:
_libgcc_mutex
ca-certificates
...
zlib

pkgs/main/linux-64::_libgcc_mutex-0.1-main
pkgs/main/linux-64::ca-certificates-2020.6.24-0
pkgs/main/linux-64::zlib-1.2.11-h7b6447c_3

Proceed ([y]/n)? y

Downloading and Extracting Packages
certifi-2019.11.28
| 153 KB
| ############################### | 100%
python-2.7.18
| 9.9 MB
| ############################### | 100%
pip-19.3.1
| 1.7 MB
| ############################### | 100%
setuptools-44.0.0
| 512 KB
| ############################### | 100%
wheel-0.33.6
| 42 KB
| ############################### | 100%
Preparing transaction: done
Verifying transaction: done
Executing transaction: done
#
# To activate this environment, use
#
#
$ conda activate py27
#
# To deactivate an active environment, use
#
#
$ conda deactivate
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

28

|

Chapter 2: Python Infrastructure

Notice how the prompt changes to include (py27) after the environment is activated:
(base) root@pyalgo:~# conda activate py27
(py27) root@pyalgo:~# pip install ipython
DEPRECATION: Python 2.7 will reach the end of its life on January 1st, 2020.
...
Executing transaction: done
(py27) root@pyalgo:~#

Finally, this allows one to use IPython with Python 2.7 syntax:
(py27) root@pyalgo:~# ipython
Python 2.7.18 |Anaconda, Inc.| (default, Apr 23 2020, 22:42:48)
Type "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
IPython 5.10.0 -- An enhanced Interactive Python.
?
-> Introduction and overview of IPython's features.
%quickref -> Quick reference.
help
-> Python's own help system.
object?
-> Details about 'object', use 'object??' for extra details.
In [1]: print "Hello Python for Algorithmic Trading World."
Hello Python for Algorithmic Trading World.
In [2]: exit
(py27) root@pyalgo:~#

As this example demonstrates, conda as a virtual environment manager allows one to
install different Python versions alongside each other. It also allows one to install dif‐
ferent versions of certain packages. The default Python installation is not influenced
by such a procedure, nor are other environments that might exist on the same
machine. All available environments can be shown via conda info --envs:
(py27) root@pyalgo:~# conda env list
# conda environments:
#
base
/root/miniconda3
py27
* /root/miniconda3/envs/py27
(py27) root@pyalgo:~#

Sometimes it is necessary to share environment information with others or to use
environment information on multiple machines, for instance. To this end, one can
export the installed packages list to a file with conda env export. However, this only
works properly by default for the same operating system since the build versions are
specified in the resulting yaml file. However, they can be deleted to only specify the
package version via the --no-builds flag:
(py27) root@pyalgo:~# conda deactivate
(base) root@pyalgo:~# conda env export --no-builds > base.yml
(base) root@pyalgo:~# cat base.yml
name: base

Conda as a Virtual Environment Manager

|

29

channels:
- defaults
dependencies:
- _libgcc_mutex=0.1
- backcall=0.2.0
- blas=1.0
- blosc=1.20.0
...
- zlib=1.2.11
- zstd=1.4.5
prefix: /root/miniconda3
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

Often, virtual environments, which are technically not that much more than a certain
(sub-)folder structure, are created to do some quick tests.4 In such a case, an environ‐
ment is easily removed (after deactivation) via conda env remove:
(base) root@pyalgo:~# conda env remove -n py27
Remove all packages in environment /root/miniconda3/envs/py27:
(base) root@pyalgo:~#

This concludes the overview of conda as a virtual environment manager.
conda not only helps with managing packages, but it is also a vir‐

tual environment manager for Python. It simplifies the creation of
different Python environments, allowing one to have multiple ver‐
sions of Python and optional packages available on the same
machine without them influencing each other in any way. conda
also allows one to export environment information to easily repli‐
cate it on multiple machines or to share it with others.

Using Docker Containers
Docker containers have taken the IT world by storm (see Docker). Although the
technology is still relatively young, it has established itself as one of the benchmarks
for the efficient development and deployment of almost any kind of software applica‐
tion.
For our purposes, it suffices to think of a Docker container as a separated (“contain‐
erized”) file system that includes an operating system (for example, Ubuntu 20.04 LTS
for server), a (Python) runtime, additional system and development tools, and

4 In the official documentation, you will find the following explanation: “Python Virtual Environments allow

Python packages to be installed in an isolated location for a particular application, rather than being installed
globally.” See the Creating Virtual Environments page.

30

|

Chapter 2: Python Infrastructure

